NixOS configuration - testing, debugging, and organization (#274)
NixOS/nix.dev: source/tutorials/nixos-configuration-on-vm.md

# NixOS Configuration debugging using virtual machines

Draft 2022.08.11

## What will you learn?

One of the most important features of NixOS is the ability to configure the entire system declaratively.
This is done using a configuration file that specifies the entire system state, including the packages to be installed and the various system settings and options.[^wikinixos]
This guide introduces the functionality of Nix Package Manager to test and debug NixOS configurations independent of a working NixOS installation.
It serves as an introduction to Nix Package Manager's ability to create virtualized instances of NixOS.

## What do you need?

<!-- todo links -->

- Basic knowledge of the Nix language.
- A working installation of Nix Package Manager or NixOS.
- nixpkgs path set in NIX_PATH 

## What is a NixOS configuration

A NixOS configuration is a declarative definition of a Linux installation that specifies which packages to install and how to configure them.

> It is written in the Nix language and uses the Nixpkgs repository, its library, packages and modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is written in the [Nix language](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/language/index.html) and uses the Nixpkgs repository, its library, packages and modules.
```

<!-- [in my dream such a blob would appear as mediawiki style page-preview at mentions of Nix language]: The Nix expression language is a pure, lazy, functional language. Its main purpose is to describe packages, compositions of packages, and variability within packages.[^nixlang] -->

> <!-- todo links: ancors to introductions to library packages and modules are currently not in the manuals -->

Reviewer: You could link to the sources. Better than nothing?

> A NixOS configuration is a file that contains a function that is structured acording to the module<!-- todo link -->  convention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A NixOS configuration is a file that contains a function that is structured according to the [NixOS module](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-writing-modules) convention.
```

> A NixOS configuration is a file that contains a function that is structured acording to the module<!-- todo link -->  convention.
> A NixOS configuration is a function that follows the convention of a module<!-- todo link to reference-->. <!-- remove one version -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A NixOS configuration is a file that contains a function that is structured according to the [NixOS module](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-writing-modules) convention.
```

<!-- [old version 2022.08.10 should be deleted] -->
<!-- The Git repository Nixpkgs provides the necessary infrastructure and information needed to specify a NixOS configuration[^nixpkgs]. -->
<!-- Nixpkgs contains a library, packages, and modules. -->
<!-- The library provides the functional infrastructure to conveniently create packages. -->
<!-- The packages defined in Nixpkgs provide build scripts needed to build software. -->
<!-- The NixOS modules are a way to configure the system. [previous formulation] provide a configuration infrastructure to generate the system's configuration files. -->

> ## Starting from default NixOS Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Starting from the default NixOS configuration
```

> On NixOS, the configuration file is normally located at `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On NixOS, the configuration file by default is located at `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`.
```

> A different location can be specified using the environment variable `$NIX_PATH`.

Reviewer: Since we won't use it, it seems irrelevant.
```suggestion
```

Diataxis: [Ignore options and alternatives.](https://diataxis.fr/tutorials/#ignore-options-and-alternatives)

> For CLI commands that use a configuration, the file path can be specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For CLI commands that use a configuration, its file path can be specified.
```

> In this guide this strategy is preferred because the goal is not to install or update NixOS, but to debug a configuration.

Reviewer: Tutorial ≠ Guide

```suggestion
In this tutorial we use this strategy, because the goal is not to install or update NixOS, but to debug a specific configuration.
```

On NixOS, you can use the `nixos-generate-config` command to create a configuration file that contains some useful defaults and configuration suggestions [^nixosconf].
You can create a NixOS configuration in your working directory:
```shell-session
nixos-generate-config --dir ./
```

In the working directory you will find two files: `configuration.nix` and `hardware-configuration.nix`.

> The `hardware-configuration.nix` file is specific to your current installation.

Reviewer: Installation of what?
```suggestion
The `hardware-configuration.nix` file is specific to the hardware the `nix-generate-config` is being run on.
```

> In the working directory you will find two files: `configuration.nix` and `hardware-configuration.nix`.
> The `hardware-configuration.nix` file is specific to your current installation.
> This file is irrelevant for this tutorial because it has no effect inside a virtual machine.
> The `configuration.nix` file contains various suggestions useful for the initial setup of a desktop computer.
> Without the comments the configuration file contains the following content:

Reviewer: Installation is a bit problematic. Installation of what?
```suggestion
In the working directory you will find two files: `configuration.nix` and `hardware-configuration.nix`.

The `hardware-configuration.nix` file is specific to the hardware the `nix-generate-config` is being run on.
We can ignore that file for this tutorial because it has no effect inside a virtual machine.

The `configuration.nix` file contains various suggestions for the initial setup of a desktop computer.
Without comments the configuration file contains the following content:
```

The `hardware-configuration.nix` file is specific to your current installation.

```

```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:
{
  imports =
    [
      ./hardware-configuration.nix
    ];

  boot.loader.systemd-boot.enable = true;
  boot.loader.efi.canTouchEfiVariables = true;

  services.xserver.enable = true;

  services.xserver.displayManager.gdm.enable = true;
  services.xserver.desktopManager.gnome.enable = true;

  system.stateVersion = "22.05";
}
```

In this tutorial we focus on testing NixOS configurations on a virtual machine, in these cases you can remove the `hardware-configuration.nix` import.

> To be able to log in, you must uncomment the section that specifies the user "alice", or add the following lines to the configuration inside the curly bracket that contain the configuration specification:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be able to log in, you must uncomment the section that specifies the user `alice`, or add the following lines to the configuration inside the curly bracket that contain the configuration specification:
```

Another point of contention, because I had the discussion with @Radvendii and @roberth recently (who are both welcome to chime in, because my perception may be badly skewed after so many iterations):
```suggestion
To be able to log in, you must uncomment the section that specifies the user `alice`, or add the following lines to the configuration inside the curly bracket that contain the system definition:
```

Reviewer 2: I'd avoid both specification and definition, because those are "meta" words that tend to refer to something more abstract than what we're discussing 99% of the time.

To illustrate my point, here is a _definition_ of definition: a statement of the meaning of a word or word group or a sign or symbol.

The overloaded meaning of _declaration_ and especially _definition_ is unfortunate. Nowadays it's possible to have a successful career in software without interacting much with the C family and its jargon, so I'd like to stick to a more natural vocabulary.

In this instance specifically, I think we can stick to simple terminology, as the point of a tutorial is to go through the motions rather than explain everything. "Configuration" seems good enough, or "configuration in `nodes.machine`" if you think it'd be unclear which part of the test this is about.

Reviewer: @roberth you mean like that?
```suggestion
To be able to log in, you must uncomment the section that specifies the user "alice", or add the following lines to the configuration inside the curly bracket that contain the configuration:
```

```nix
  users.users.alice = {
    isNormalUser = true;
    extraGroups = [ "wheel" ];
    packages = with pkgs; [
      firefox
      thunderbird
    ];
  };
```

Additionally, you need to specify a password for this user.

> An insecure solution is to specify an unencrypted plaintext password by adding the `initialPassword` option to the user configuration:

Reviewer: I think unencrypted and plain text are the same thing.
```suggestion
An insecure solution is to specify an plain text password by adding the `initialPassword` option to the user configuration:
```

Reviewer 2: There's no need for security in a test, so let's keep it simple.
This could be a nice example of configuration that you only add in the test and not in the production configuration.

```nix
nodes.machine = { ... }: {
  # ...
  users.users.alice.initialPassword = "test-password";
}
```

I'd also recommend `test-password`, because we don't need to tire the reader with unnecessary hints that something would be bad (boy who cried wolf).

```nix
    initialPassword = "danger";
```

Note that this may pose a security risk.
A more secure option is to encrypt a password using sha-512.
To create an encrypted password (here using "danger" as an example), execute:
```shell-session
$ mkpasswd -m sha-512 danger
```

Copy the output of `mkpasswd` into the user configuration and use the `initialHashedPassword` option.
It should look something like this:
```nix
    initialHashedPassword = "$6$YLpneQLpnPxXpo1Y$mTZg26KMjWIBqP1N98LzeANb5rfMcC5t7a7Khf/gTB/rPCT4t4x2EgJJZmXkRWcGVW6ZEDMulsjTsXxD7BLZZ/";

> ```

Reviewer: For a tutorial, decide on one option.

The complete `configuration.nix` file now looks like this:
```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:
{
  boot.loader.systemd-boot.enable = true;
  boot.loader.efi.canTouchEfiVariables = true;

  services.xserver.enable = true;

  services.xserver.displayManager.gdm.enable = true;
  services.xserver.desktopManager.gnome.enable = true;

  users.users.alice = {
    isNormalUser = true;
    extraGroups = [ "wheel" ]; # Enable ‘sudo’ for the user.
    packages = with pkgs; [
      firefox
      thunderbird
    ];
    initialHashedPassword = "$6$YLpneQLpnPxXpo1Y$mTZg26KMjWIBqP1N98LzeANb5rfMcC5t7a7Khf/gTB/rPCT4t4x2EgJJZmXkRWcGVW6ZEDMulsjTsXxD7BLZZ/";
  };

  system.stateVersion = "22.05";
}
```

## Manual testing of a NixOS configuration

> One of the most powerful features in the Nix ecosystem is **the ability
> to provide a set of declarative NixOS configurations and use a simple
> Python interface** to interact with them using [QEMU](https://www.qemu.org/)
> as the backend.

Reviewer: I'd be careful with attributions such as "simple".
```suggestion
One of the most powerful features in the Nix ecosystem is **the ability
to provide a set of declarative NixOS configurations and use an interactive
Python shell** to interact with them using [QEMU](https://www.qemu.org/)
as the backend.
```

Those tests are widely used to ensure that NixOS works as intended, so in general they are called **NixOS tests**.
They can be written and launched outside of NixOS, on any Linux machine (with
[MacOS support coming soon](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/108984)).
Integration tests are reproducible due to the design properties of Nix,
making them a valuable part of a Continuous Integration (CI) pipeline. [^nixdev]

### Creating a QEMU based virtual machine using a configuration

> A virtual machine is created with the `nix-build` command.

Reviewer: Generally I suggest splitting (even such short) units of meaning into paragraphs. For reference: https://www.plainlanguage.gov/guidelines/concise/write-short-paragraphs/

```suggestion
A virtual machine is created with the `nix-build` command.

```

> To select the configuration.nix in the working directory, specify the configuration file as an argument:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To select `configuration.nix` in the working directory, specify the configuration file as an argument:
```

```shell-session

> $ nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix

Reviewer: We may have to at least add a note that the search path is for illustration purposes and link to the relevant article. Best would be of course to have a best-practice example, if it's not too noisy.

Author: I basically think it is too [noisy](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/pinning-nixpkgs-in-documentation-examples/20749/7). I wrote before: "Because examples should be simple they should not break on any system that is stable so should be good enough, concise and should cause little traffic to download packages."

Author: I changed my mind its ok.

```
[^nixosrebuild]

> This command builds the attribute `vm` utilizing the nixpkgs as specified in the environment variable `NIX_PATH` and using the nixos-config as specified using a relative path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command builds the attribute `vm` utilizing the version of Nixpkgs as specified in the environment variable `NIX_PATH` and using the NixOS configuration as specified in the relative path.
```
But, as above, we should not resort to `NIX_PATH` and actually kill it with fire.

### Running the virtual machine

> The previous command creates a link with the name `result` in the working directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The previous command created a link with the name `result` in the working directory.
```

Maybe also show the output, and put the explanatory sentence right there.

> It links to the folder that contains the virtual machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It links to the folder that contains the virtual machine.

```

> To run the virtual machine execute:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run the virtual machine, execute:
```

```shell-session
$ ./result/bin/run-nixos-vm
```

> This command opens a window that shows the boot process of the virtual machine and ends at the `gdm` login screen where you can log in as alice with the password "danger".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command opens a window that shows the boot process of the virtual machine and ends at the `gdm` login screen where you can log in as `alice` with the password `danger`.
```

# NixOS Configuration debugging using virtual machines

Draft 2022.08.11

## What will you learn?

One of the most important features of NixOS is the ability to configure the entire system declaratively.
This is done using a configuration file that specifies the entire system state, including the packages to be installed and the various system settings and options.[^wikinixos]
This guide introduces the functionality of Nix Package Manager to test and debug NixOS configurations independent of a working NixOS installation.
It serves as an introduction to Nix Package Manager's ability to create virtualized instances of NixOS.

## What do you need?

<!-- todo links -->

- Basic knowledge of the Nix language.
- A working installation of Nix Package Manager or NixOS.
- nixpkgs path set in NIX_PATH 

> ## What is a NixOS configuration
> 
> A NixOS configuration is a declarative definition of a Linux installation that specifies which packages to install and how to configure them.
> It is written in the [Nix language](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/language/index.html) and uses the Nixpkgs repository, its library, packages and modules.
> <!-- [in my dream such a blob would appear as mediawiki style page-preview at mentions of Nix language]: The Nix expression language is a pure, lazy, functional language. Its main purpose is to describe packages, compositions of packages, and variability within packages.[^nixlang] -->
> <!-- todo links: ancors to introductions to library packages and modules are currently not in the manuals -->
> A NixOS configuration is a file that contains a function that is structured according to the [NixOS module](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-writing-modules) convention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 
> <!-- [old version 2022.08.10 should be deleted] -->
> <!-- The Git repository Nixpkgs provides the necessary infrastructure and information needed to specify a NixOS configuration[^nixpkgs]. -->
> <!-- Nixpkgs contains a library, packages, and modules. -->
> <!-- The library provides the functional infrastructure to conveniently create packages. -->
> <!-- The packages defined in Nixpkgs provide build scripts needed to build software. -->
> <!-- The NixOS modules are a way to configure the system. [previous formulation] provide a configuration infrastructure to generate the system's configuration files. -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
